README.md, before:

# GitOps PR Automator

[![GitHub Super-Linter](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/linter.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/super-linter/super-linter)
![CI](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)
[![Check dist/](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/check-dist.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/check-dist.yml)
[![CodeQL](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml)
[![Coverage](./badges/coverage.svg)](./badges/coverage.svg)

This GitHub Action streamlines your GitOps workflow by automating the process of
updating version references within your GitOps configuration repository. By
creating pull requests (PRs) with updated versions, it helps maintain
consistency and reduces manual intervention.

A pull request is automatically created against the GitOps repository,
containing the updated version references. This PR is ready for review and
merging into your main branch, triggering your GitOps reconciliation process.

To leverage this action, you need a central GitOps repository where your
environment-specific configurations are stored.

```mermaid
graph TD
subgraph GitOps Config Repository
  A[GitOps Config Repo]
end

subgraph Application Repositories
  B[App Repo 1]
  C[App Repo 2]
  D[App Repo 3]
end

B --> A[New Release Trigger]
C --> A[New Release Trigger]
D --> A[New Release Trigger]
A --> GitHub[New PR]
```

Pull requests are created when a new release is detected in the source
repositories with changes history. ![pr.png](docs/pr.png)

## Usage

### Create a config file in your GitOps config repository

You can create multiple config files in your GitOps repository, each containing
different references to the source repositories and other parameters

```yaml
# Unique identifier for the configuration, important to have unique ids for each
# configuration and it will be used to create branch names
id: gitops-pr-automator
# Parameters for the PRs created
pullRequest:
  title: 'GitOps automated release'
  githubLabels:
    - gitops
    - gitops-test
  enableAutoMerge: 'squash'
  pullRequestComment: |
    This PR was automatically created by the GitOps PR Automator.
    Please review the changes and merge if they look good.
  commitHistory:
    disable: false # You can disable commit history in the PR
    onlyMergeCommits: false # You can include only merge commits in the PR

#  Manage the PRs lifecycle created by the action
#  alwaysCreateNew: true
#  leaveOpenOnlyNumberOfPRs: 2

# You can define regex patterns for all repositories and
# override them for specific repositories
# regex:
#  - '(?<=(tag: ))[a-f0-9]{40}(?=(.*))'
# Source repositories to monitor for new releases
sourceRepos:
  - repo: abdolence/gitops-pr-automator # Repository to monitor
    ref: heads/master # Branch to monitor
    releaseFiles: # Files to monitor for new releases in GitOps config repository
      - path: '**/*.values.yaml' # Glob syntax to match files
        # Regex to both match and replace the version in the file
        # The regex leverages lookbehind and lookahead assertions
        # to match the version string and replace it
        regex:
          - '(?<=(tag: ))[a-f0-9]{40}(?=(.*))'
```

This configuration file will monitor the `abdolence/gitops-pr-automator`
repository for new releases on the `master` branch. When a new release is
detected, the action will create a PR in the GitOps config repository with the
updated version references in the `*.values.yaml` files in GitOps config
repository. You can specify multiple `sourceRepos` in the configuration file to
monitor.

Pay attention to the `regex` field in the configuration file which describes
both:

- How to match the version string in the file
- How to replace the version string in the file

In this example, the action will look for a string of 40 hexadecimal characters
following `tag:` and replace it with the new version. You can specify multiple
`regex` in the configuration file to match and replace.

Some other useful examples of regex:

- `(?<=(tag: ))[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\.[0-9]+(?=(.*))` - match and replace semantic
  versioning
- `(?<=(image.tag\n(\s)*value:\s))[a-f0-9]{40}(?=(.*))` - match and replace the
  version in the Helm chart values file

### Create a GitHub Action workflow in your GitOps config repository

Create a GitHub Action workflow in your GitOps repository that uses this action.

```yaml
name: GitOps PR Automator
on:
  workflow_dispatch:

concurrency:
  group: ${{ github.workflow }}
  cancel-in-progress: true

jobs:
  create-pr:
    name: Create a PR with updated version references
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    # These permissions are sufficient only if GitHub App token is used.
    permissions:
      contents: read

    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        id: checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Create GitOps PR
        id: create-pr
        uses: abdolence/gitops-pr-automator@v1
        with:
          # GitHub token with permissions to read the source repositories
          # and create PRs in this one. This token should be fine-grained since
          # it requires content write permissions.
          github-token: ${{ secrets.GH_AUTOMATION_TOKEN }}
          # Another option is that you can provide a separate token
          # with read permissions to the repos.
          # github-token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
          # github-token-read-repos: ${{ secrets.GH_AUTOMATION_TOKEN_READ_REPOS }}
          config-path: '.github/gitops/gitops-pr-automator.config.yaml'
```

### Trigger the action from your source repositories

Update the source repositories to trigger the action when a new release is
detected with this step.

```yaml
      - name: Trigger GitOps PR automation
        if: github.ref_protected
        uses: actions/github-script@v6
        with:
          # GitHub token with permissions to trigger workflows in the GitOps
          github-token: ${{ secrets.GH_TRIGGER_WORKFLOWS }}
          script: |
            await github.rest.actions.createWorkflowDispatch({
             owner: '<your-github-owner>',
             repo: '<your-gitops-config-repo>',
             workflow_id: '<github-actions-workflow-file-name>.yaml',
             ref: 'master'
          })
```

## GitHub tokens

Recommend way to use the GitHub token is to create a separate GitHub
application, following this
[guide](https://docs.github.com/en/apps/creating-github-apps/authenticating-with-a-github-app/making-authenticated-api-requests-with-a-github-app-in-a-github-actions-workflow).
In this case you can restrict the application to the particular repositories and
scope.

## Versioning schemes

The action supports the following versioning schemes:

- `commit-sha-only` - the full commit SHA of the source repository, default mode
- `commit-tags-or-sha` - the tags of the source repository and if not present
  the full commit SHA.
- `commit-tags-only` - the tags of the source repository. If tags are not
  available, the commit SHA is not used.

## Security

This action uses the GitHub token provided to create pull requests and also read
commit history. Ensure that the token has the necessary permissions to create
pull requests and read commit history.

To reduce the surface the plugin uses GitHub Actions Toolkit to ensure the code
is secure. Also used dependencies in the code are minimal and the code is
written in TypeScript (so, no binary is executed), and also it is easier to
audit.

## Licence

Apache Software License (ASL)

## Author

Abdulla Abdurakhmanov

Commit message:

Config override from action workflows support (#38)

README.md, after:

# GitOps PR Automator

[![GitHub Super-Linter](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/linter.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/super-linter/super-linter)
![CI](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)
[![Check dist/](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/check-dist.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/check-dist.yml)
[![CodeQL](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/actions/typescript-action/actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml)
[![Coverage](./badges/coverage.svg)](./badges/coverage.svg)

This GitHub Action streamlines your GitOps workflow by automating the process of
updating version references within your GitOps configuration repository. By
creating pull requests (PRs) with updated versions, it helps maintain
consistency and reduces manual intervention.

A pull request is automatically created against the GitOps repository,
containing the updated version references. This PR is ready for review and
merging into your main branch, triggering your GitOps reconciliation process.

To leverage this action, you need a central GitOps repository where your
environment-specific configurations are stored.

```mermaid
graph TD
subgraph GitOps Config Repository
  A[GitOps Config Repo]
end

subgraph Application Repositories
  B[App Repo 1]
  C[App Repo 2]
  D[App Repo 3]
end

B --> A[New Release Trigger]
C --> A[New Release Trigger]
D --> A[New Release Trigger]
A --> GitHub[New PR]
```

Pull requests are created when a new release is detected in the source
repositories with changes history. ![pr.png](docs/pr.png)

## Usage

### Create a config file in your GitOps config repository

You can create multiple config files in your GitOps repository, each containing
different references to the source repositories and other parameters

```yaml
# Unique identifier for the configuration, important to have unique ids for each
# configuration and it will be used to create branch names
id: gitops-pr-automator
# Parameters for the PRs created
pullRequest:
  title: 'GitOps automated release'
  githubLabels:
    - gitops
    - gitops-test
  enableAutoMerge: 'squash'
  pullRequestComment: |
    This PR was automatically created by the GitOps PR Automator.
    Please review the changes and merge if they look good.
  commitHistory:
    disable: false # You can disable commit history in the PR
    onlyMergeCommits: false # You can include only merge commits in the PR

#  Manage the PRs lifecycle created by the action
#  alwaysCreateNew: true
#  leaveOpenOnlyNumberOfPRs: 2

# You can define regex patterns for all repositories and
# override them for specific repositories
# regex:
#  - '(?<=(tag: ))[a-f0-9]{40}(?=(.*))'
# Source repositories to monitor for new releases
sourceRepos:
  - repo: abdolence/gitops-pr-automator # Repository to monitor
    ref: heads/master # Branch to monitor
    releaseFiles: # Files to monitor for new releases in GitOps config repository
      - path: '**/*.values.yaml' # Glob syntax to match files
        # Regex to both match and replace the version in the file
        # The regex leverages lookbehind and lookahead assertions
        # to match the version string and replace it
        regex:
          - '(?<=(tag: ))[a-f0-9]{40}(?=(.*))'
```

This configuration file will monitor the `abdolence/gitops-pr-automator`
repository for new releases on the `master` branch. When a new release is
detected, the action will create a PR in the GitOps config repository with the
updated version references in the `*.values.yaml` files in GitOps config
repository. You can specify multiple `sourceRepos` in the configuration file to
monitor.

Pay attention to the `regex` field in the configuration file which describes
both:

- How to match the version string in the file
- How to replace the version string in the file

In this example, the action will look for a string of 40 hexadecimal characters
following `tag:` and replace it with the new version. You can specify multiple
`regex` in the configuration file to match and replace.

Some other useful examples of regex:

- `(?<=(tag: ))[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\.[0-9]+(?=(.*))` - match and replace semantic
  versioning
- `(?<=(image.tag\n(\s)*value:\s))[a-f0-9]{40}(?=(.*))` - match and replace the
  version in the Helm chart values file

### Create a GitHub Action workflow in your GitOps config repository

Create a GitHub Action workflow in your GitOps repository that uses this action.

```yaml
name: GitOps PR Automator
on:
  workflow_dispatch:

concurrency:
  group: ${{ github.workflow }}
  cancel-in-progress: true

jobs:
  create-pr:
    name: Create a PR with updated version references
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    # These permissions are sufficient only if GitHub App token is used.
    permissions:
      contents: read

    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        id: checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Create GitOps PR
        id: create-pr
        uses: abdolence/gitops-pr-automator@v1
        with:
          # GitHub token with permissions to read the source repositories
          # and create PRs in this one. This token should be fine-grained since
          # it requires content write permissions.
          github-token: ${{ secrets.GH_AUTOMATION_TOKEN }}
          # Another option is that you can provide a separate token
          # with read permissions to the repos.
          # github-token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
          # github-token-read-repos: ${{ secrets.GH_AUTOMATION_TOKEN_READ_REPOS }}
          config-path: '.github/gitops/gitops-pr-automator.config.yaml'
          # You can override the configuration file with:
          # config-override: |
          #   pullRequest:
          #    githubLabels:
          #    - gitops-test-override
```

### Trigger the action from your source repositories

Update the source repositories to trigger the action when a new release is
detected with this step.

```yaml
      - name: Trigger GitOps PR automation
        if: github.ref_protected
        uses: actions/github-script@v6
        with:
          # GitHub token with permissions to trigger workflows in the GitOps
          github-token: ${{ secrets.GH_TRIGGER_WORKFLOWS }}
          script: |
            await github.rest.actions.createWorkflowDispatch({
             owner: '<your-github-owner>',
             repo: '<your-gitops-config-repo>',
             workflow_id: '<github-actions-workflow-file-name>.yaml',
             ref: 'master'
          })
```

## GitHub tokens

Recommend way to use the GitHub token is to create a separate GitHub
application, following this
[guide](https://docs.github.com/en/apps/creating-github-apps/authenticating-with-a-github-app/making-authenticated-api-requests-with-a-github-app-in-a-github-actions-workflow).
In this case you can restrict the application to the particular repositories and
scope.

## Versioning schemes

The action supports the following versioning schemes:

- `commit-sha-only` - the full commit SHA of the source repository, default mode
- `commit-tags-or-sha` - the tags of the source repository and if not present
  the full commit SHA.
- `commit-tags-only` - the tags of the source repository. If tags are not
  available, the commit SHA is not used.

## Security

This action uses the GitHub token provided to create pull requests and also read
commit history. Ensure that the token has the necessary permissions to create
pull requests and read commit history.

To reduce the surface the plugin uses GitHub Actions Toolkit to ensure the code
is secure. Also used dependencies in the code are minimal and the code is
written in TypeScript (so, no binary is executed), and also it is easier to
audit.

## Licence

Apache Software License (ASL)

## Author

Abdulla Abdurakhmanov
